Blog: The Product-Market Fit Game (#5953)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/product-market-fit-game.md

This guide is based on what I've learned at PostHog through 5 or 6 pivots, to eventually finding product-market fit, growing revenue to $MM, and onboarding more than 20k customers. It also incorporates what we've seen from ~50 [YCombinator](https://ycombinator.com/) startups we've consulted with on this topic.

## The 5 levels of product-market fit

Finding product-market fit is a game, and games have levels. My Product-Market Fit Game has five levels:

1. Find a significant problem to work on
2. Validate the problem by talking to users
3. Get users to use your product
4. Keep users coming back 
5. Onboard your first 5 reference customers

You need to complete all five levels to win. All but the first level have multiple failure modes. These are listed – go through them sequentially. Sometimes, you will find you cannot complete a level, and need to pivot your entire company.

Let's press start...

### Level 1 - Find a significant problem work on

//TODO: Graphic for level here

> Start by solving a problem you've had yourself. It needs to be a problem you've _actually tried to solve_, otherwise it can't be a significant problem.

Author: Options:

- "...problem you've _experienced first-hand_".
- "... problem you've _tried and failed to solve_ in your life."

I do wonder if this framing a bit too specific. First-hand experience feels a little less restrictive, but less true to James' intent. Thoughts on the above @jamesefhawkins?

> Start by solving a problem you've had yourself. It needs to be a problem you've _actually tried to solve_, otherwise it can't be a significant problem.

Reviewer: no, specifically i mean it has to be a problem you have _had_ but also _done something about_ before. if it's just a problem you had but never tried to solve, it wasn't a big deal

> Start by solving a problem you've had yourself. It needs to be a problem you've _actually tried to solve_, otherwise it can't be a significant problem.

Reviewer: clarified

- **Be wary about building what's trendy.** It's easier to beat unsexy, badly run, non-innovative companies than software companies with VC funding _and_ using the latest technology. Do not be fooled about news articles covering huge fundraises by startups working in these areas – fundraising + press ≠ success. In fact, the trendier the space, the less likely a big round means the company is succeeding.[^1]

- **Conservative buyers demand differentiation.** You could probably get someone to use a new phone company, but you won't get an enterprise to use an uproven CRM. A rip and replace strategy is harder to execute with less differentiation than selling a product to someone who hasn't got anything in place at all.

During this phase, write down every single potential customer conversation. It's easy to get recency bias, and you may want to come back to a detail that didn't seem important at the time. Be thorough and open ended in your questions.

At PostHog, we built a Google Doc over 100 pages long in the first few weeks of doing this. Capture seemingly innocuous details. You never know if you'll re-use your hard-earned research with a different idea later.

> Many people spend months or years attempting to validate their idea in advance, and make no progress as a result. You will always get more clarity by doing something rather than hypothesizing forever. 

Author: ```suggestion
Many people spend months or years attempting to validate their idea in advance, and make no progress as a result. You will always get more clarity by building something rather than hypothesizing forever, so don't spend too long at this stage.
```

@ivanagas I think this clarifies the point better. Bottom line: don't faff around! 😉

If an idea fails, there's _zero_ downside to pivoting.

### Level 2 - Validate the problem really exists by talking to users

> // TODO: Level 2 image here

Author: Lottie level image here

Be aware that many people you talk to will show interest out of politeness, or because they genuinely _could_ see themselves using your product one day. Neither will help you get actual usage. [The Mom Test](https://www.momtestbook.com/) provides plenty more information here if you want to learn more. 

If the problem is a high priority one, it's likely your potential customer will have already gone to considerable lengths to solve it. Recalling the words of Dalton Caldwell, one of the YC partners we worked most closely with: 

> _"If a company has a crappy self-built system that they're reliant on, there's probably a good business to be built providing exactly that product"._ 

In the early days of PostHog, we found that teams who needed more control of their data were building their own analytics infrastructure, instead of using the existing SaaS products. Invariably their solutions were hideously complex to build, and underwhelming.

> Try to find as specific a problem as you can. The clearer the problem is, the simpler it'll be for you to validate and solve it. Specificity doesn't just come from what your product _does_, it also comes from the _user_ you are targeting. For example, PayPal realized that power sellers on eBay had issues with payments.

Author: I think it's ok, but I see your point.

* **You are talking to the wrong users.** If so, no one will take calls, or if they do, they don't have your problem. Ask yourself – why did you have this problem, but those speaking to you don't? When you do get calls, ask who would have this problem. Change the user you are targeting.

* **You aren't a good listener.** You're doing calls, users are seemingly confirming that they have your problem, but they don't use the product later. Why? Ask some open-ended questions to users in each call – perhaps you're close but not _quite_ right with your problem and target user statement. Ask your co-founder to shadow you on some calls, and give each other direct feedback afterwards on which questions worked well. This may help you find a new problem, in case...

* **The problem you want to solve isn't there.** Pivot. Find a new problem to solve.

### Level 3 - Validate your MVP by recruiting real users

> //TODO: Level 3 image here

Author: Lottie level image here

> //TODO: Level 3 image here

Author: Lottie level image here

> You should start Level 3 as soon as you have something for users to use. You need to _keep_ talking to users throughout this level, but now you can validate better because you have a product they can see.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should start level 3 as soon as you have something for users to use. You need to _keep_ talking to users throughout this level, but now you can validate better because you have a product they can see.
```

The goal here is to see if people actually care, as quickly as possible. No matter how excited you get after interviewing people about their problems, there's no substitute for seeing what people _do_ instead of what they _say_. 

> With one of the ideas Tim and I worked on before we pivoted to PostHog, we had 15 companies who "wanted to try it". We built a product, sent the invite link, and only _one_ even clicked the link and started using it. It's a good thing we hadn't spent 6+ months building the "perfect" product before this happened!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With one of the ideas Tim and I worked on before we pivoted to PostHog, we had 15 companies who "wanted to try it". We built a product, sent the invite link, and only _one_ clicked the link and started using it. It's a good thing we hadn't spent 6+ months building the "perfect" product before this happened!
```

> The most obvious users to start with here are those that you've already met during levels 1 and 2. You should have been identifying a _problem_ that these users have during those calls. Now you have a _solution_, you should email them saying so.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most obvious users to start with are the ones you've already met during levels 1 and 2. You should have been identifying a _problem_ that these users have during those calls. Now you have a _solution_, you should message and email them saying so.
```

#### Failure modes

These are all the reasons why users may not use your product:

> * **Users have no idea what your solution is**, so they think it could be a waste of time. Even if your product is free, people's time is not. The more senior your likely users, the stronger this effect. Can you work with someone that _reports_ to the person you were targeting to get things setup? If you struggle to get responsiveness, start questioning if something else is causing issues – even a senior stakeholder will put in work to solve a serious problem they have.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users have no idea what your solution is**, so they think it could be a waste of time. Even if your product is free, people's time is not. The more senior your users, the stronger the effect. Can you work with someone that _reports_ to the person you were targeting to get things setup? If you struggle to get responses, start questioning if something else is causing issues – even a senior stakeholder will put in work to solve a serious problem they have.
```

> - **You're not explaining your product clearly.** The way you explain your product matters. If it's complicated, people won't understand it. Describe it like you would when speaking to a friend. Ask users if the above is why they didn't start using it. Explain that you are seeking direct feedback in your message, or on a call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **You're not explaining your product clearly.** The way you explain your product matters. If it's complicated, people won't understand it. Describe it like you would when speaking to a friend. Ask users for direct feedback on your explanation.
```
The last two sentences are unclear.

> - **You lack credibility.** Businesses won't take a chance on you if your website is a mess, or you appear disorganized. At best, it'll be a waste of time for them; at worst, your product may be insecure, or cause them issues. Hopefully, during Level 1, you picked this idea because you've encountered it personally. That might mean you're well-qualified to solve it for others. Clarify your credentials, if relevant and impressive, when you interact with them. People (mostly) won't voice their fears, so they may go silent or, worse, give you misleading feedback that it's something else.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **You lack credibility.** Businesses won't take a chance on you if your website is a mess, or you appear disorganized. At best, it'll be a waste of time for them; at worst, your product may be a security risk, or cause them issues. Hopefully, during level 1, you picked this idea because you've encountered it personally. That might mean you're well-qualified to solve it for others. When you interact with them, clarify your credentials, if relevant and impressive. People (mostly) won't voice their fears, so they may go silent or, worse, give you misleading feedback that it's something else.
```

> * **Users are sceptical your solution will solve the problem**, so there's no point trying. Potential customers are unlikely to try your product if they disagree with your approach. Possible failure modes here include statements like "software can't solve a people problem" or "AI looks cool, but won't work in real-life applications because it's not accurate enough".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users are skeptical your solution will solve the problem**, so there's no point trying. Potential customers are unlikely to try your product if they disagree with your approach. Signs here include statements like "software can't solve a people problem" or "AI looks cool, but won't work in real-life applications because it's not accurate enough".
```

> * **Users cannot access your solution.** Here's what happened with the very first PostHog users. Double/triple check it's possible to start using your product.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users cannot access your solution.** Here's what happened with the very first PostHog users. Triple check it's possible to start using your product.
```

![a whatsapp screenshot of our first potential user telling us the login page was broken](../images/02/Screenshot-2020-02-25-at-21.52.15.png)

> * **Users are worried about using your solution.** Does your solution require, for example, personal or private company data to operate? Seek feedback: "Hey, I saw you've not used it yet – could I get some really blunt feedback. Did something put you off?" Can you reduce how much data you need access to, or make your product, website and approach feel more mature to signify competence? If the perceived security risk doesn't outweigh the benefit of solving the problem, the problem may not be big enough.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users are worried about using your solution.** Does your solution require, for example, personal or private company data to operate? Seek feedback: "Hey, I saw you've not used it yet – could I get some really blunt feedback. Did something put you off?" Can you reduce how much data you need access to? Can you make your product, website and approach feel more mature to signify competence? If the perceived security risk doesn't outweigh the benefit of solving the problem, the problem may not be big enough.
```

> * **Users don't want to solve this problem.** Many problems aren't high priority, and your solution feels like a hassle to them. Can you make the product feel 10x simpler to use, or 10x more compelling to them? If not... pivot to a new problem. Back to Level 0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users don't want to solve this problem.** Many problems aren't high priority, and your solution feels like a hassle to them. Can you make the product feel 10x simpler to use, or 10x more compelling to them? If not... pivot to a new problem. Back lo Level 0.
```

* **Users don't really have the problem** you thought they had from your interviews. Pivot to a new problem. Back to Level 0.

### Level 4 – Validate your product by retaining users

> 

Author: Lottie image here

Hooray, so people are showing up. Now you need to see if they're coming back or not. Figure out what your expected frequency is for usage, and check if that's roughly how often users are using your product. Users will return if you can repeatedly solve a problem for them.

> Avoid relying on things like reminder emails, or notifications purely designed to get users to log back into your product. If it takes this sort of effort to retain users, your product probablty isn't valuable to them. Focus _exclusively_ on building features that make your product more powerful, or easier to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Avoid relying on things like reminder emails or push notifications purely designed to get users to log back into your product. If it takes this sort of effort to retain users, your product probably isn't valuable to them. Focus _exclusively_ on building features that make your product more powerful or easier to use.
```

If they're willing, ask them to perform tasks live in front of you, and ask them why they clicked certain things. You'll be shocked at how many ways people get confused – that's a _great_ problem to have if they're coming back.

Start "closing the loop" with users. This is a simple process to improve your product:

![product improvement loop](../images/blog/pmf-game-guide/product-loop.png)

Closing the loop above is the way to cement your product-market fit because:

1. **Your product will get better fast.** You should weight user feedback very heavily compared to your instincts around what to build. 

2. **It will generate word of mouth growth.** The one thing you can compete on is speed – you can outperform any competitors by providing a ridiculously excellent experience to your early users, so they will tell their friends. 

3. **Listening to users compounds.** Like a snowball rolling down a hill, the more you listen to users and act on their feedback, the more useful feedback they'll share with you. 

#### Failure modes

> * **Users aren't activating.** This means although they _signed up_, but can't _configure_ / get started with your product, so they _never_ get any value from it. You have two options here:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users aren't activating.** This means although they _signed up_, but they can't _configure_  or _get started_ with your product, so they _never_ get any value from it. You have two options here:
```

>   1. Activate your users manually. The classic example is the founders of Stripe who [used to visit their first users in person](http://paulgraham.com/ds.html#Manual) to integrate their product for them. Do things that don't scale. The bonus of this approach is that you'll get deeper customer interaction, so you'll learn more and you'll get a better relationship which will help you get more feedback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. Activate your users manually. The classic example is the founders of Stripe who [used to visit their first users in person](http://paulgraham.com/ds.html#Manual) to set up their product for them. Do things that don't scale. The bonus of this approach is that you get a deeper customer interaction, so you learn more and create a better relationship which helps you get more feedback.
```

  
  2. Make your activation/onboarding simpler. Can you make it 10x simpler?

> * **You are getting conflicting feedback on what to build.** Go to Level 5, this will help clarify which users are your Ideal Customer Profile, and which aren't. Hopefully this exercise will help you pick a clearer direction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **You are getting conflicting feedback on what to build.** Go to level 5, this will help clarify which users are your Ideal Customer Profile, and which aren't. This provides a clearer direction.
```

> * **Your product isn't solving your users' problem**, hence there is no point coming back. Build a new product for the same problem, or fix your existing product. Restart level 4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Your product isn't solving your users' problem**, hence there is no point coming back. Build a new product for the same problem, or fix your existing product. Restart level 3.
```

> * **Your product is painful to use.** Get feedback from users, look at session replays, or watch people trying to use it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Your product is painful to use.** Get feedback from users, view session replays, or watch people trying to use it.
```

> * **Your users don't need to come back repeatedly.** Perhaps you've automatically solved the problem with no further user work. Proceed to Level 5 and validate this by seeing if they will pay for it. Don't force product engagement if it's irrelevant to solving the problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Your users don't need to come back repeatedly.** Perhaps you've automatically solved the problem with no further user work. Proceed to level 5 and validate their willingness to pay. Don't force product engagement if it's irrelevant to solving the problem.
```

> * **Users use your product but don't encounter your problem often.** Proceed to Level 5. It may be hard to get significant revenue for an infrequent problem, or it may be that you don't experience much demand. If the number of users that experience this problem is huge even if the order value is tiny, that's ok. If it was extremely hard finding the first users _and_ it's hard to charge much for the product, this problem isn't a big enough one – go back to level 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Users use your product but don't encounter your problem often.** Proceed to level 5. It may be hard to get significant revenue for an infrequent problem, or it may be that you don't experience much demand. If the number of users that experience this problem is huge even if the order value is tiny, that's ok. If it was extremely hard finding the first users _and_ it's hard to charge much for the product, this problem isn't a big enough one – go back to level 1.
```

### Level 5 - Onboard your first 5 reference paying customers

Start by figuring out your [Ideal Customer Profile](/blog/creating-ideal-customer-profile).

> Write down needs, haves and attributes you think your Ideal Customer Profile users might have in common. These should be _very_ specific. They could be individual-level and/or company-level things.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Write down needs, haves, and attributes you think your Ideal Customer Profile users might have in common. These should be _very_ specific. They could be individual-level and/or company-level things.
```

Do not just assume one or two things like "engineers in startups with over 100 staff". Definitely do not just list an industry. The specific things we considered at PostHog were:

> ![psothog icp](../images/blog/pmf-game-guide/posthog-icp.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![posthog icp](../images/blog/pmf-game-guide/posthog-icp.png)
```

Feel free to include some anti-needs and haves too – i.e. things your Ideal Customer Profile _doesn't_ need or have.

> List out all the potential users you could sell down the first column in a spreadsheet, and score them against all of these attributes. Color-code the spreadsheet so you can spot patterns easily. As you start to see if people are happy to pay 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List out all the potential users you could sell down the first column in a spreadsheet, and score them against all of these attributes. Color-code the spreadsheet so you can spot patterns easily. As you start to see if people are happy to pay.
```

Be upfront with customers. This step may prove tricky if you never set any commercial expectation with them early on. If so, you may find it easier to sell to newer users with clearer expectations. Use your website to make clear that your service is a paid one, or will be once you're of beta. 

> You will also need some pricing. You are likely to change this a bunch of times. Step 1 is to create some kind of internal table for you to use and iterate. Step 2 may be to make this transparent online and step 3 - for companies focusing on self-serve - is to enable people to pay without talking to you. Don't leap straight to self-serve though, since you'll get fewer lessons from users – you're not trying to optimize revenue growth early on, you're trying to optimize your ability to learn.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will also need pricing. You are likely to change this many times. 
1. Create some kind of internal table for you to use and iterate. 
2. Potentially make this transparent online.
3. For companies focusing on self-serve - is to enable people to pay without talking to you. Don't leap straight to self-serve though, since you'll get fewer lessons from users – you're not trying to optimize revenue growth early on, you're trying to optimize your ability to learn.
```

Now it's to get your first reference customer. This means a customer that pays full list price, is using the product as you expect, and would happily recommend you to others. 

If you reach this point... congratulations, you've completed the product-market fit game. If not, 
go back to Level 0.

## What you need to complete the game

### A co-founder

> The Product-Market Fit Game is a co-op game, especially if you're looking to build a huge, VC-backed company. It'll take a long time, there will be thousands of decisions to take. The only true way to fail is to give up. You're more likely to persist with two people.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Product-Market Fit Game is a co-op game, especially if you're looking to build a huge, VC-backed company. It'll take a long time, there will be thousands of decisions to make. The only true way to fail is to give up. You're more likely to persist with two people.
```

The good news is that design starts with copy. If you get simple, clear language onto your website that explains what you _do_, and meets the other use cases your visitors may have, then you're ahead of 75% of other websites.

Don't worry about pixel perfection. I once met [Malthe Sigurdsson](https://twitter.com/malthe), who ran design at Stripe. I went into the conversation expecting to hear that they spent months and months in Figma before shipping anything. Instead, he told me that great designers are fast and iterative. They don't get things perfect first time around.

### A "build fast" mentality

As with most early-stage startup stuff, you're more likely to be wrong than right (the vast majority of startups fail, after all), so optimize for this scenario.

You are trying to figure out if anyone cares, so the speed you can ship your first feature is the most important factor. Scalability is irrelevant. Use a software stack you've used before, as long as it's reasonably popular. We used Django and React in the early days.

> Ship features embarassingly early. The kind of user that'll pick up a random piece of software that no one has ever used before is an early adopter. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ship features embarassingly early. Appeal to the kind of user that'll pick up a random piece of software that no one has ever used before. 
```

> Unless your product's USP is superior design, it's preferable to ship clunky/ugly/slightly broken functionality, and quickly improve it, than to waste months on something no one cares about.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unless your product's unique selling point is superior design, it's preferable to ship clunky/ugly/slightly broken functionality, and quickly improve it, than to waste months on something no one cares about.
```
Idk what USP is on first glance

### An open and responsive attitude 

> Aside from closing the loop, don't put anyone or anything between the person(s) writing the code and your users. This will slow you down and will cause confusion. Moreover, it's likely a better experience for a user to spend time with the person that actually built the product. It is more effective in the long run to productize answers to users' problems, than it is to spent lots of time triaging issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aside from closing the loop, don't put anyone or anything between the person(s) writing the code and your users. This slows you down and causes confusion. Moreover, it's a better experience for a user to spend time with the person that actually built the product. It is more effective in the long run to productize answers to users' problems, than it is to spent lots of time triaging issues.
```

---

> date: 2023-01-19

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2023-05-16
```

Many people spend months or years attempting to validate their idea in advance, and make no progress as a result. You will always get more clarity by doing something rather than hypothesizing forever. 

Many people spend months or years attempting to validate their idea in advance, and make no progress as a result. You will always get more clarity by building something and getting it into users' hands
, so don't spend ages at this level.

### Level 2 - Validate the problem really exists by talking to users

// TODO: Level 2 image here

Now that you _think_ there is a problem, you should figure out if others see the same issue. To do this, talk to them.

This can be very challenging – you're asking people to give up their time in the vague hope that you _might_ one day decide to solve their problem, if indeed they even have the problem. 

It's too late to tell you this, but the more helpful you've been to other people in your career, the easier you'll find this phase!

Here are a list of ways to get meetings, ranked from easiest to hardest:

> ![6 ways to get meetings](../images/blog/pmf-game-guide/ways-to-get-meetings-posthog.png)

Reviewer 3: nice list

Try to get out of this role into level 3 as quickly as possible. I'd advocate one co-founder focuses on this, while the other is continuously building then throwing things away as needed. To give a real-life example, Tim and I spent about 1 week in level 2 on average.

#### Failure modes

Work your way from top to bottom:

* **You aren't working hard enough.** Realize no one else is going to do this for you. Set a goal for how many meetings you want to get. I got 2 meetings a day, 5 days a week while doing any other random tasks like building our website. Try to get to all these in person if you can afford to do so. Most communication is non-verbal, so it'll make it easier to learn what people are thinking. I'd encourage you to move to a hub for your industry if you can. I'd also encourage moving in with your co-founder, so you can focus 100% on the work for this intense period. Running out of momentum is your biggest risk.

> * **You aren't being clear what the problem is,** so it's hard to recruit users to validate it. Create a simple, single sentence description of the problem you think you're solving (ahead of doing the same for the _product_ you eventually build), and the user you are targeting. If what you're working on feels vague, you'll get a lukewarm response to your messages trying to book meetings. Do not use benefits-language here – users won't have the attention span to figure out what your product does.

Author: @jamesefhawkins Examples here

> * **You aren't being clear what the problem is,** so it's hard to recruit users to validate it. Create a simple, single sentence description of the problem you think you're solving (ahead of doing the same for the _product_ you eventually build), and the user you are targeting. If what you're working on feels vague, you'll get a lukewarm response to your messages trying to book meetings. Do not use benefits-language here – users won't have the attention span to figure out what your product does.

Reviewer: done

 
* **Your product isn't solving your users' problem**, hence there is no point coming back. Build a new product for the same problem or fix your existing product. Then restart level 4.

* **Your product is painful to use.** Get feedback from users, look at session replays, or watch people trying to use it.

* **Your users don't need to come back repeatedly.** Perhaps you've completely automatically solved the problem now with no further user work. Proceed to Level 5 and validate this by seeing if they will pay for it. Don't force product engagement if it's irrelevant to solving the problem.

* **Users use your product but don't encounter your problem often.** Proceed to Level 5. It may be hard to get significant revenue for an infrequent problem, or it may be that you don't experience much demand. If the number of users that experience this problem is huge even if the order value is tiny, that's ok. If it was extremely hard finding the first users _and_ it's hard to charge much for the product, this problem isn't a big enough one – go back to Level 1.

### Level 5 - Onboard your first 5 reference customers

> This will help you get your first customer, and then it'll help you figure out your Ideal Customer Profile.

Author: ```suggestion
Start by figuring out your [Ideal Customer Profile](/blog/creating-ideal-customer-profile) – ours is [high-growth startups that have product-market fit](/handbook/strategy/ideal-customer-persona). 
```

Write down needs, haves and attributes you think your Ideal Customer Profile users might have in common. These should be _very_ specific. They could be individual-level and/or company-level things.

Do not just assume one or two things like "engineers in startups with over 100 staff". Definitely do not just list an industry. The specific things we considered at PostHog were:

* **Needs:**
  * to control user data
  * to excel at product-led growth to remain competitive
  * have budget and savvy engineers are the decision makers
  * do _not_ need to put us through a formal procurement process
* **Haves:**
  * achieved product market fit
  * an unsuccessful centra analytics function
  * products aimed at businesses
  * deployed our open source product successfully
  * used one of our free products

Feel free to include some anti-needs and haves too – things your Ideal Customer Profile _doesn't_ need or have.

> List out all the potential users you could sell down the first column in a spreadsheet, and score them against all of these attributes. Color-code the spreadsheet so you can spot patterns easily. As you start to see if people are happy to pay 

Author: @jamesefhawkins has this spreadsheet already

Be upfront with customers. If you never set any commercial expectation with them early on, this step may prove tricky. You probably didn't want to approach the topic as the last thing you wanted was to do anything that could scare them off. If this was the case, then consider you may find it easier to sell newer users who have had clearer expectations set. Use your website to make clear that your service is a paid one, or will be once you're of beta. 

> You will also need some pricing. You are likely to change this a bunch of times. Step 1 is to create some kind of internal table for you to use and iterate. Step 2 may be to make this transparent online and step 3 - for companies focusing on self-serve - is to enable people to pay without talking to you. Don't leap straight to self-serve though, since you'll get fewer lessons from users – you're not trying to optimize revenue growth early on, you're trying to optimize your ability to learn.

Reviewer: done, very succinctly

Now it's to get your first reference customer. This means a customer that pays full list price, is using the product as you expect, and would happily recommend you to others. 

If you reach this point... congratulations, you've completed the product-market fit game. If not, 

> go back to Level 0.

Author: @jamesefhawkins

* **Board / fundraising:** This ties closely to company strategy. While the CEO should do _all_ investor calls, so the other can drive the business in the meantime, it's important to keep in touch with each other on progress.
  * Conscious effort to keep the other cofounder updated on fundraising - shared notes, weekly discussion
  * Cofounders both attend board meetings / existing investor catchups and have areas they cover

> #### Choosing a co-founder
> 
> I could write a whole article on this, but here are some questions you can discuss with potential co-founders:
>
> * How long are we willing to try to hit product market fit?
> * How long can we afford to try?
> * Do we want to raise money or bootstrap the company?
> * What will you want to look back on having achieved when you're 80?
> * What sort of company do you want to run? How would it look and feel day to day?
> * What roles would we each have? Will you feel happy about this in 5 years?
> * Would you sell for $1M / $10M / $100M / $1Bn?
> * What kind of work do you want to do / what don't you want to do?

### A simple, well-designed website

Website design is probably more important than you think.

> When it comes to the website, most people will grab a template to get something thrown together quickly.

Author: ```suggestion
When it comes to the website, most people will grab a template to get something thrown together quickly, which is fine at first.
```

> Cory, PostHog's lead designer, and self-proclaimed webmaster, put this really nicely "we didn't start by thinking we could build the slickest website, so we built one that felt different instead".

Author: ```suggestion
Cory, PostHog's lead designer, and self-proclaimed webmaster, put this really nicely: 

> "We didn't start by thinking we could build the slickest website, so we built one that felt different instead".
```

When it comes to the product, you want to ship a competent-feeling product, but in most cases, it doesn't need to be best-in-class. I'd argue that your website's design is _more_ important when you're in a phase of trying to get anyone to sign up, since it's probably where you're losing 90% or more of potential signups.

The good news is that design starts with copy. If you get simple, clear language onto your website that explains what you _do_, and meets the other use cases your visitors may have, then you're ahead of 75% of other websites.

> Don't worry about pixel perfection. I once met (Malthe Sigurdsson)[https://twitter.com/malthe], who ran design at Stripe. I went into the conversation expecting to hear that they spent months and months in Figma before shipping anything. Instead, he told me that great designers are fast and iterative. They don't get things perfect first time around.

Author: ```suggestion
Don't worry about pixel perfection. I once met [Malthe Sigurdsson](https://twitter.com/malthe), who ran design at Stripe. I went into the conversation expecting to hear that they spent months and months in Figma before shipping anything. Instead, he told me that great designers are fast and iterative. They don't get things perfect first time around.
```

### A "build fast" mentality

As with most early-stage startup stuff, you're more likely to be wrong than right (the vast majority of startups fail, after all), so optimize for this scenario.

You are trying to figure out if anyone cares, so the speed you can ship your first feature is the most important factor. Scalability is irrelevant. Use a software stack you've used before, as long as it's reasonably popular. We used Django and React in the early days.

Ship features embarassingly early. The kind of user that'll pick up a random piece of software that no one has ever used before is an early adopter. 

> Unless your software's main priority is being better designed, it's preferable to ship clunky/ugly/slightly broken functionality and quickly improve it, than to waste months on something no one cares about.

Author: ```suggestion
Unless your product's main USP is superior design, it's preferable to ship clunky/ugly/slightly broken functionality, and quickly improve it, than to waste months on something no one cares about.
```

### An open and responsive attitude 

> Aside from closing the loop, don't put anyone or anything between the person writing the code and your users. This will slow you down and will cause confusion. Moreover, it's likely a better experience for a user to spend time with the person that actually built the product. It is more effective in the long run to productize answers to users' problems, than it is to spent lots of time triaging issues... which wind up with you or your engineers anyway.

Author: ```suggestion
Aside from closing the loop, don't put anyone or anything between the person(s) writing the code and your users. This will slow you down and will cause confusion. Moreover, it's likely a better experience for a user to spend time with the person that actually built the product. It is more effective in the long run to productize answers to users' problems, than it is to spent lots of time triaging issues.
```

Set a clear responsibility for this with your co-founder. When Tim and I started getting users, I kept trying to get _more_ users while he focused completely on our existing ones.

> Remember that users are human beings, and your success entirely depends on them. Make sure their experience with you is a joyful one. The way you even open a call sets the tone for the whole conversation. Be energetic and happy to be there! Do the legwork for them – it shows them that their opinions are valued and thus they'll keep interacting with you. That means writing up your notes, and creating issues or features in response, all of which you send to them. It means responding quickly to them – within minutes if you can.

Author: ```suggestion
Remember that users are human beings, and your success entirely depends on them. Make sure their experience with you is a joyful one. The way you even open a call sets the tone for the whole conversation. Be energetic and happy to be there! 

Do the legwork for them – it shows them that their opinions are valued and thus they'll keep interacting with you. This means writing up your notes, and creating issues, or features in response, all of which you send to them. It means responding quickly to them – within minutes if you can.
```

When it comes to pricing, reduce the risk for your earliest customers. Charge them monthly rather than annually, unless they prefer the latter.

There are multiple methods available. You can charge a recurring monthly rate, or you can charge on usage.

Once you're on a call, get the prospect to open up about their challenges, and figure out with them if your product could solve their problems. It's worth qualifying the lead as you do this. The simplest method is BANT (Budget, Authority, Need, Timeline).

Layer your questions.

* Level 1 - "What are the requirements for this project?", "how will you pick a vendor?", "do you have a set budget?"
* Level 2 - "This sounds important, why?", "would you consider a product that didn't include that feature?" and so on. 
* Level 3 - "If your end users were thoroughly trained and using this product effecitvely, what impact would that have on your revenue?", "what does solving this mean for you?".

Prioritize time with those that are best-qualified.

> Once someone decides to move forward, you'll need something for people to sign. YC provide a [free sales agreement](https://www.ycombinator.com/sales_agreement/) for SaaS companies. Be flexible around your earliest customers for the terms they need – it's not about maximizing revenue or contract length, it's about getting your first deal signed and learning.

Reviewer 2: +1

> Once someone decides to move forward, you'll need something for people to sign. YC provide a [free sales agreement](https://www.ycombinator.com/sales_agreement/) for SaaS companies. Be flexible around your earliest customers for the terms they need – it's not about maximizing revenue or contract length, it's about getting your first deal signed and learning.

Author: @jamesefhawkins Cut down or split into separate sections?

> Once someone decides to move forward, you'll need something for people to sign. YC provide a [free sales agreement](https://www.ycombinator.com/sales_agreement/) for SaaS companies. Be flexible around your earliest customers for the terms they need – it's not about maximizing revenue or contract length, it's about getting your first deal signed and learning.

Reviewer: done!

## The why, when, and how of pivoting

> A lot of the hustle/grind culture around startups would make you think that the very best startups took years and years of work to get off the ground. The reality, once we got into YC, was the opposite. It felt like the _majority_ of the best companies there pivoted – most ideas people were working on needed to change. Since most startups fail, you're probably doing something wrong if you _don't_ pivot. At PostHog, we pivoted six times in the first six months!

Author: ```suggestion
A lot of the hustle/grind culture around startups would have you believe the very best startups took years and years of work to get off the ground. The reality, once we got into YC, was the opposite. 

It felt like the _majority_ of the best companies there pivoted. Since most startups fail, you're probably doing something wrong if you _don't_ pivot! At PostHog, we pivoted six times in the first six months!
```

The five levels of The Product-Market Fit Game should help you work out when you need to pivot, but here are a few more pointers:

> - **Motivation matters.** If you aren't excited about what you're working on, pivot. It's as simple as that. You're going to go a lot further if you're working on something that feels like it's _your_ startup versus someone else's.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Motivation matters.** If you aren't excited about what you're working on, pivot. It's as simple as that. You'll achieve more if you're working on something that feels like it's _your_ startup.
```

- **Be decisive.** During our YC batch, we saw a few companies have one founder work on X, while another worked on Y. The problem of finding product-market fit is already complex, so don't add any extra variables like "just one of us was trying, not both" to make it even harder. Pick one idea and go all in. If you fail, quickly move to the other idea. We also saw instances where companies debated pivoting for several weeks – if you have tried everything in the list above, and are questioning yourself constantly, then you probably should have pivoted already.

> - **_Do _not_ become a solution looking for a problem.** It is very easy to become attached to your existing code or problem. Be especially wary of very fractional pivots. For example, one of our first ideas was a tool to monitor tech debt – it would insert a survey as a GitHub check asking the engineer where they encountered problems, and how long was wasted. We had to pivot when it was impossible to sell it – since the insight it provided wasn't being _acted_ upon by teams, they got little real value. When then moved into using the same surveys to monitor engineering happiness, re-using our code - the result? A week of wasted meetings.

Author: ```suggestion
- **_Do _not_ become a solution looking for a problem.** It's easy to become attached to your existing code or problem. Be especially wary of very fractional pivots. One of our first ideas was a tool to monitor tech debt – it inserted a survey as a GitHub check asking the engineer where they encountered problems, and how much time was wasted. We had to pivot when it was impossible to sell it. When then moved into using the same surveys to monitor engineering happiness, re-using our code. The result? A week of wasted meetings.
```

## Final thoughts

For Tim and me, one of the most important parts of getting to product market fit, was simply driving from our house to dinners at YC and back  for an hour a few times a week.

Getting to product market fit is very hard because it's a multi variate problem - you simply do not know _exactly_ why things are or are not working in the early days. As you get further along, you start to figure out what the variables are, and you realize there are more and more of them than you realized.

As a result, you'll be filled with doubt by default in the early days. At the same time, you should be cranking as fast as humanly possible because you'll learn the most by doing.

So, why the drives?

> The ultimate failure mode is not to grasp the big picture of what you're working on. One of the most important things you can do is remind yourself - you are playing this game. Take time out every week. For us, being in a car meant we didn't have our laptops and it forced us to reflect. Give yourself the space to look at this game as the big picture.

Author: @jamesefhawkins Punched up this conclusion a little. Let me know if it's missing anything.

> The ultimate failure mode is not to grasp the big picture of what you're working on. One of the most important things you can do is remind yourself - you are playing this game. Take time out every week. For us, being in a car meant we didn't have our laptops and it forced us to reflect. Give yourself the space to look at this game as the big picture.

Reviewer: i like it, couple of tiny changes made, commiting the change...

> The ultimate failure mode is not to grasp the big picture of what you're working on. One of the most important things you can do is remind yourself - you are playing this game. Take time out every week. For us, being in a car meant we didn't have our laptops and it forced us to reflect. Give yourself the space to look at this game as the big picture.

Reviewer: merged this in under a separate commit...

2. If you're in an accelerator, message other companies. Be personalized.
3. People from companies that your product is perfect for.
4. Events. You may be able to get free tickets via a partner.

In general, do not do marketing (paid ads / content) expecting to get a sale – these are more scalable methods. Be hands on. Other companies in your space will have heavily invested in how to do outbound or marketing, so the most likely way you can win is on quality and personalization with your approach.

Keep yourself accountable – set some goals for meetings booked and stick to them.

As with booking feedback calls, be hyper responsive. If you respond to people within minutes (whether booking a meeting, or progressing a deal), you'll get them while they're available and happy to engage. I used to obsessively respond to people on LinkedIn all day while in this phase.

When it comes to pricing, reduce the risk for your earliest customers. Charge them monthly rather than annually, unless they prefer the latter.

There are multiple methods available. You can charge a recurring monthly rate, or you can charge on usage.

> Once you're on a call, get the prospect to open up about their challenges, and figure out with them if your product could solve their problems. It's worth qualifying the lead as you do this. The simplest method is BANT (Budget, Authority, Need, Timeline).

Author: ```suggestion
Once you're on a call, get the prospect to open up about their challenges, and figure out with them if your product could solve their problems. It's worth qualifying the lead as you do this. The simplest method is [BANT](https://www.techtarget.com/searchcustomerexperience/definition/BANT) (Budget, Authority, Need, Timeline).
```

---

> date: 2023-05-16

Author: ```suggestion
date: 2023-06-08
```

- **Known problems are easier to validate,** but your solution must be very different. If you want to build a venture scale business then, in the long run, your solution must be 10x better, or 10x cheaper, than the existing solutions for significant numbers of people to use and/or pay for it.

- **Be careful when validating problems no one else has worked on.** Maybe you see something others are missing, but it's more likely the problem isn't important.

- **Be wary about building what's trendy.** It's easier to beat unsexy, badly run, non-innovative companies than software companies with VC funding _and_ using the latest technology. Do not be fooled huge fundraises by startups working in these areas: `big funding rounds + press ≠ product-market fit`. In fact, the trendier the space, the less likely a big round means the company is succeeding.[^1]

- **Conservative buyers demand differentiation.** You could probably get someone to try a new social app, but you won't get an enterprise to use an unproven CRM. A rip and replace strategy is harder to execute than a blue ocean strategy. It is easier to sell a product to someone who hasn't got anything in place.

> 
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

- **Step 2** may be to make this transparent online. Don't do this until step 1 is working reasonably well.

- **Step 3**, for companies focusing on self-serve, is to enable people to pay without talking to you. Do this only after step 2, and only if it suits your go to market. If you're enterprise focused and selling from the top down, it's a bad idea. If you're product-led then go for it.

> **Important:** Don't leap straight to self-serve. Remember that, at this stage, you're optimizing for learning, not revenue. Jumping too soon to self-serve will reduce your opportunities for learn. I (with hindsight, corectly) felt it was very important to talk to our early users about what they're prepared to pay.

Now it's to get your first reference customer. This means a customer that pays full list price, is using the product as you expect, and would happily recommend you to others. If you manage this five times – congratulations, you've completed the product-market fit game.

Once you get 5 reference customers, you are _well_ on your way to product market fit. After this:

> * repeat your formula to around $1M in ARR, by yourself (I'd advocate for a minimum of $500K if you are confident at sales and everything is feeling easy and repeatable, more than $1M if you are still feeling things are different every time you sell or it's proving tough)
> * then see if other people are successful at following your playbook - try with two other people to reduce the chance it's a person problem, not a product market fit problem.

Author: ```suggestion
* Repeat your formula to around $1M in ARR, by yourself. I'd advocate for a minimum of $500K if you are confident at sales and everything is feeling easy and repeatable, more than $1M if you are still feeling things are different every time you sell or it's proving tough.

* Then see if other people are successful at following your playbook. Try with two other people to reduce the chance it's a person problem, not a product market fit problem.
```

Now you're likely at product market fit - it should just feel easy to grow. If not, [talk to me](https://twitter.com/james406).

#### Failure modes

> * **You outsource sales to someone else.** It is already a multivariate problem trying to get product market fit, don't also add in the question of "is it the product, or the person selling it" by relying on someone else. Realistically, a founder (regardless of the level of experience) is _the_ best person in the world to sell the product they made. Lots of people want to outsource or even skip this step - fear of failure at the final hurdle, a lack of confidence through never having sold before, laziness (it is a painful, hard experience to sell a product) or ego (I've raised a lot of money, this isn't the best use of my time). The reason a founder should focus on this, is that having a valid business model is critical _and_ getting there may require lots of iteration on product, pricing, positioning and so on. A founder can change all of these things more quickly and easily than an employee.
> * **You can't get the first customer** If people are repeatedly using your product, but not willing to pay - it's either (i) they have a bad problem and wish your product could solve it, but it doesn't or (ii) the problem is there but not very high value. If it's the former, you need to figure out how to make your product solve the problem better - are you missing a key piece of functionality? Is it just hideously buggy so people don't really feel like it's making their lives easier and they resent paying? If the problem is low value, go back to Level 1 - find a new idea to work on.
> * **People aren't truly happy but you are managing to get revenue from them** It's likely you have the combination of charging very little but not actually solving the problem - they're paying _something_ out of politness or a hope you'll one day solve their problem. If they aren't happy _and_ are paying a lot, they must have a huge problem and are just hopeful you'll figure it out. In either case, go back to the previous level and try to solve the problem more fully. 
> * **You can't get all five customers to look like each other** Well done on getting something sold. However, you can't sell a different product to every customer and call that product market fit! Can you repeat one of the sales you made four more times? Then you've completed this level. If not, go back a level.
> * **You keep getting stuck on this step** if you repeatedly get a little traction but cannot convert that to revenue, you perhaps don't have the skills to solve the problem you're tackling properly, even if the problem exists. If you _want_ to keep trying again, I suggest you do, but if this has happened a bunch of times, you'll probably have an easier time if you just choose an easier-to-solve problem.

Author: ```suggestion
* **You outsource sales to someone else.** Achieving product-market fit is already a multivariate problem, so avoid adding an additional "is it the product, or the person selling it?" variable. Realistically, a founder is, regardless of experience, _the_ best person in the world to sell the product they made. Founders outsource or skip this step for various reasons (e.g. fear of failure, lack of confidence, laziness, or ego), but you must resist these. Having a valid business model is critical _and_ getting there may require lots of iteration on product, pricing, positioning and so on. A founder can change all of these things more quickly and easily than an employee.

* **You can't get the first customer.** If people are repeatedly using your product, but not willing to pay – it's either (i) they have a bad problem and wish your product could solve it, but it doesn't or (ii) the problem is there but not very high value. If it's the former, you need to figure out how to make your product solve the problem better. Are you missing a key piece of functionality? Is it just hideously bug, so people resent paying? If the problem is low value, go back to Level 1 – find a new idea to work on.

* **People are paying but aren't truly happy.** It's likely you have the combination of charging very little but not actually solving the problem – i.e. they're paying _something_ out of politeness, or a hope you'll one day solve their problem. If they aren't happy _and_ are paying a lot, they must have a huge problem and are just hopeful you'll figure it out. In either case, go back to the previous level and try to solve the problem more fully. 

* **You can't get all five customers to look like each other** Well done on getting something sold. However, you can't sell a different product to every customer and call that product market fit! Can you repeat one of the sales you made four more times? Then you've completed this level. If not, go back a level.

* **You keep getting stuck on this step.** If you repeatedly get a little traction but cannot convert that to revenue, you perhaps don't have the skills to solve the problem you're tackling properly, even if the problem exists. If you _want_ to keep trying again, I suggest you do, but if this has happened a bunch of times, you'll probably have an easier time if you just choose an easier problem.
```

## Final thoughts

Getting to product-market fit is hard because it's a multivariate problem. Most of the time, you simply do not know _exactly_ why things are, or are not, working. As a result, you'll (rightly) be filled with doubt in the early days. This is normal.

In hindsight, one of the keys to PostHog achieving product-market fit was the the regular downtime Tim and I shared when driving to and from YC dinners a few times each week.

Why?

Because the ultimate failure mode is not grasping the big picture. Those hour-long drives without our laptops forced us to reflect. Forced us to step away from the grind and interrogate everything we'd learned so far.

> You can't complete the product-market fit game without hard work and persistence. But sometimes you need to pause, look at the map, find your bearings, and choose your next objective. So, every week - make time to reflect.

Author: ```suggestion
You can't complete the product-market fit game without hard work and persistence. But sometimes you need to pause, look at the map, find your bearings, and choose your next objective. So, every week – make time to reflect.
```
